---
layout: project
categories: [mapping, urban]
date_start: 2018-12-01
date: 2019-01-01
title: Plan/0
tagline: An alternative, bottom-up, citizen-driven mobility plan for a less car-centered and more livable Schaerbeek.
organisation: 1030/0
image: 1030-0.png
---
I am part of a citizen-driven initiative to propose an alternative mobility plan for the Brussels commune of Schaerbeek. After a series of traffic-deaths where pedestrians and cyclists were run over by cars, citizens felt that too little was being done to change the street layout or combat exessive speeding. A collective called 1030/0 was formed, organising remembrances for those who lost their lives and demonstrations to draw attention to high-risk crossings. The aim was also to interact with politians, holding them accountable for the current situation and checking the proposed measures. Often, their reply was that 'not mutch more can be done in this densely populated part of town'. Many disagreed and wanted to present the potential for dynamic, versatile and convivial mobility in Schaerbeek. Hence, part of the collected started a co-creation process called 'Plan/0' to explore different possible approaches and work towards a concrete, inspiring and community-supported long-term vision for an inclusive, ecological, shared and safe mobility vision for Schaerbeek.

Drawing from similar intitatives in Ghent and Leuven, we studied the possibilities to stop through traffic through cut and filters, upgrade highly commercial streets to pedestrian streets, separate public and bike traffic, connect and secure slow-traffic routes and reclaim parts of the public space. Our process included car-circulation brainstorm sessions, collective drawing processes, workshops with local commerces and strategy plannings.

I was involved in a large part of the cartographic work, preparing and synthesising the co-creating processes and facilitating some of the workshops.